---
title: Zack's Dance Notes 
description: Zack's notes on Salsa, Bachata, Merengue, Rumba, and Zouk
---

# Zack's Dance Notes 

## Introduction 
This website is my attempt to figure out how to write down how to dance. 

I've tried to keep notes since I started dancing almost a decade ago and it
hasn't worked. I found that I could write down things that might cue up my
memory of what I had done before, but that I couldn't write down all of what I
had learned, just little sayings that might prod me to remember what had
happened during the lesson. After even just a week or two, if I hadn't
diligently committed it all to memory somehow, it was gone beyond some muscle
memory and whatever I might have picked up conceptually. 

Over time, those muscle memories and conceptual fundamentals built up to the
point that I can say confidently I am a good dancer. I get compliments often
from people I dance with and sometimes I even get asked to dance by someone who
I don't know, the highest compliment a lead can receive in my opinion. So, at
the very least, I know I am not a beginner anymore.

After a broken ankle and a pandemic enforced break from dancing though, I felt
like I was starting over when I started dancing again this past summer. I
understood and anticipated that physically I would still be recovering from my
injury, but I didn't expect to also have to recover mentally so much. It felt
like I remembered maybe a dozen moves, some cross body leads, some spins, some
of this and some of that, but nothing like the whole breadth of language that I
had before. I take lessons now and find myself remembering that I learned the
moves described almost a decade ago and forgotten them almost entirely by now.

When I dance I feel a logic to the movements beyond just the pattern of the day,
a grammar that tells me what is and isn't possible at any given moment, with a
personal taste as to what I would like to happen next as I lead the dance with
my partner in that moment. But it has always felt like there is something just
outside my reach, a platonic ideal of the dance, something I am headed towards but
can never quite hold onto. I can only catch whatever it is out of the side of my
eye and try to express what I saw in the moment, but it's gone as soon as the
next beat arrives and drives us forward and away. 

I think I knew I wasn't a beginner anymore after I had several dances that felt
like we were both channeling the heart of the moves directly. Dances that happen
without warning, the right song, the right person, the right connection, the
right something, that I knew in the moment I would be remembering and chasing
the high of for years afterwards. You may have noticed that I've waited until
now in all these words to say which styles I dance. While I've danced Salsa,
Bachata, Merengue, Zouk, 2 Step, Line Dancing, Swing, and a couple other dances,
I only consider myself a Salsa dancer because that's the only dance where I've
had those dances when everything went exactly right.  

These notes are one of the ways I am chasing those few dances I had in my past
that stood out at the same time as everything else faded away during my break.
In my heart, I know there is a way to write down these ideals of dancing in a
way that goes beyond just remembering what I had personally experienced before.
I have to believe that language is powerful enough to convey all how these
movements work and fit together. I want to gather up up these movements and bind
them down in written language and turn them into something that can extend
outside myself and help me find again those dances I had in the past that refused to
let themselves be forgotten. 

Learning how to dance is an oral tradition, with moves being passed down person
to person and whole communities built around a shared language of dance through
a common body of moves. We pray with our moves, that we might be granted the
right in that moment to express and embody the ideal that we all know exists but
cannot write down in any meaningful way. I want to break this oral tradition and
wrestle these ideals down to earth so I can look at them straight on and truly
understand them. I'm publishing these notes in the hopes that others might feel
the same and care to join me on the hunt to capture these ideals with words. I
hope they are as helpful to you as they have been so far to me.

\- Zack Maril 

## Salsa 

### Fundamentals  
* Types 
* Timing 

### Steps 
* Basic Step 
* Side Step  
* Cumbia Step 
* Open Breaks 
* Circular step 
* Variations on the pause 

### Positions 
* Closed
* Open 
* Social 
* Copa 
* Shadow 
* Cross body lead? 
* Hammer locked 
* Traveling 

### Moves 
* 

### Patterns 


## Drills 

* Spin drills 
* Arm drills 
* Movement drills 
* Footwork
* Shines 


## Tools 

## Paid courses 